docs/content/devel/todo.md, before:

+++
title = 'TODO List'
date = 2024-08-31T18:43:34+01:00
weight = 100
+++

# TODO List

## API

- Finalise the font API.
- Is the distinction between `pdf.Native` and `pdf.Object` really useful?
  Maybe we should just use `pdf.Object` everywhere?

## General

- Make sure that readers cannot get into infinite loops when resources
  depend on each other in a cycle.
- test that we don't write numbers like `0.6000000000000001` in content streams
- By more systematic about the use of pdf.MalformedFileError, and in
  particular the `Loc` field there.
- avoid PDF output like `[-722 (1) -722] TJ` for centered text
- make a central list of all external assets/resources I include

## Fonts

- reconsider PostScriptName for *sfnt.Font.
- test that the widths of the `.notdef` character is correct for the
  standard 14 fonts
- double-check that I am correctly using the "Adobe Glyph List" and "Adobe
  Glyph List for New Fonts"

## Testing

- make sure that unit tests don't leave stray files behind

## Missing Features

- implement high-quality text extraction
- implement RunLengthDecode filters
- implement JBIG2Decode filters
- implement JPXDecode filters
- implement Crypt filters
- allow for incremental updates to PDF files
- add a way to repair broken xref tables?
- implement public key encryption?
- should the library support FDF files?

Commit message:

Simplify font.Layouter.Encode() interface by removing width parameter
API change: The font.Layouter.Encode() method signature has changed
from Encode(gid glyph.ID, width float64, text string) to Encode(gid
glyph.ID, text string). The width parameter has been removed as
implementations now always compute the glyph width directly from the
font's glyph data. This affects all font type implementations
including CFF, OpenType, TrueType, Type1, and Type3 fonts.

docs/content/devel/todo.md, after:

+++
title = 'TODO List'
date = 2024-08-31T18:43:34+01:00
weight = 100
+++

# TODO List

## Next Steps

- Implement property lists.
- Make Resource dictionaries file-independent.
- make dict.Type3 file-independent
- Try to merge `updateTextPosition` in "op-text.go" with the
  corresponding code from `processText` in "reader/reader.go".
- Get rid of `ResourceManagerEmbedFunc` and `EmbedHelperEmbedFunc`.
- Should graphics.NewWriter really take a ResourceManager argument?

## API

- Finalise the font API.
- Is the distinction between `pdf.Native` and `pdf.Object` really useful?
  Maybe we should just use `pdf.Object` everywhere?

## General

- Make sure that readers cannot get into infinite loops when resources
  depend on each other in a cycle; Extend pdf.Extractor with better loop detection.
- test that we don't write numbers like `0.6000000000000001` in content streams
- By more systematic about the use of pdf.MalformedFileError, and in
  particular the `Loc` field there.
- avoid PDF output like `[-722 (1) -722] TJ` for centered text
- make a central list of all external assets/resources I include

## Fonts

- reconsider PostScriptName for *sfnt.Font.
- test that the widths of the `.notdef` character is correct for the
  standard 14 fonts
- double-check that I am correctly using the "Adobe Glyph List" and "Adobe
  Glyph List for New Fonts"

## Testing

- make sure that unit tests don't leave stray files behind

## Missing Features

- implement high-quality text extraction
- implement RunLengthDecode filters
- implement JBIG2Decode filters
- implement JPXDecode filters
- implement Crypt filters
- allow for incremental updates to PDF files
- add a way to repair broken xref tables?
- implement public key encryption?
- should the library support FDF files?
