docs/content/pdf/functions.md, before:

+++
title = 'PDF Functions'
date = 2025-06-18T13:53:00+01:00
+++

# PDF Functions

## Overview

PDF functions are parameterized mathematical transformations that map m input values to n output values. These static, self-contained numerical transformations are used throughout PDF for color transformations, halftone spot functions, smooth shadings, and other mathematical operations.

Functions operate within defined domains (valid input ranges) and optionally ranges (valid output ranges). Input values are automatically clipped to the domain, and output values are clipped to the range. All inputs and outputs must be numbers, and functions have no side effects.

PDF functions are available in PDF 1.2 and later, with Types 2 and 3 introduced in PDF 1.3.

## PDF Function Representation

PDF functions are represented as either dictionaries or streams, depending on the function type:

**Function Dictionary** contains common entries shared by all function types:

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | The function type: 0 (Sampled), 2 (Exponential), 3 (Stitching), or 4 (PostScript calculator). |
| `Domain` | array | Array of 2 × m numbers defining input ranges. For each input i, Domain[2i] ≤ xi ≤ Domain[2i+1]. |
| `Range` | array | Array of 2 × n numbers defining output ranges. For each output j, Range[2j] ≤ yj ≤ Range[2j+1]. Required for Type 0 and 4. |

## Function Types

### Type 0: Sampled Function

Type 0 functions use a table of sample values with interpolation to approximate functions with bounded domains and ranges.

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | Must be `0`. |
| `Domain` | array | Array of 2 × m numbers defining input ranges. |
| `Range` | array | Array of 2 × n numbers defining output ranges. |
| `Size` | array | Array of m positive integers specifying number of samples in each input dimension. |
| `BitsPerSample` | integer | Bits per sample value. Valid values: 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 24, 32. |
| `Order` | integer | (Optional) Interpolation order. 1 for linear, 3 for cubic spline. Default: 1. |
| `Encode` | array | (Optional) Array of 2 × m numbers for linear mapping of inputs to sample table indices. Default: [0 (Size₀-1) 0 (Size₁-1)...]. |
| `Decode` | array | (Optional) Array of 2 × n numbers for linear mapping of samples to output range. Default: same as Range. |

The stream contains Size₀ × Size₁ × ... × Sizeₘ₋₁ sample values, each using BitsPerSample bits. Samples are packed continuously with no padding at byte boundaries. For multidimensional input, the first dimension varies fastest. For multidimensional output, values are stored in Range order.

To implement Type 0 functions, clip inputs to domain, encode to sample indices, interpolate between nearest samples, decode the result, and clip to range. The Decode array can creatively increase accuracy for specific range values.

### Type 2: Power Interpolation Function

Type 2 functions define power interpolation: y = C0 + x^N × (C1 - C0).
(The PDF spec calls "exponential interpolation".)

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | Must be `2`. |
| `Domain` | array | Array of 2 numbers defining input range. |
| `Range` | array | (Optional) Array of 2 × n numbers defining output ranges. |
| `C0` | array | (Optional) Array of n numbers defining function result when x = 0.0. Default: [0.0]. |
| `C1` | array | (Optional) Array of n numbers defining function result when x = 1.0. Default: [1.0]. |
| `N` | number | The interpolation exponent. |

Domain must ensure x ≥ 0 if N is non-integer, and x ≠ 0 if N is negative. When N = 1, the function performs linear interpolation between C0 and C1. Each output component j is calculated as: yⱼ = C0ⱼ + x^N × (C1ⱼ - C0ⱼ).

### Type 3: Stitching Function

Type 3 functions combine multiple 1-input functions across different subdomains to create a single function.

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | Must be `3`. |
| `Domain` | array | Array of 2 numbers [Domain₀ Domain₁] defining overall input range. |
| `Range` | array | (Optional) Array of 2 × n numbers defining output ranges. |
| `Functions` | array | Array of k 1-input functions to be stitched. All must have same output dimensionality. |
| `Bounds` | array | Array of k-1 numbers defining subdomain boundaries. Must be in increasing order within Domain. |
| `Encode` | array | Array of 2 × k numbers mapping each subdomain to corresponding function's domain. |

The domain is partitioned into k subdomains using Bounds values. The first subdomain is [Domain₀, Bounds₀), intermediate subdomains are [Boundsᵢ, Boundsᵢ₊₁), and the last is [Boundsₖ₋₂, Domain₁]. Special cases apply when Domain₀ = Bounds₀. Each input value is mapped to its subdomain, encoded using the Encode array, then passed to the corresponding function.

### Type 4: PostScript Calculator Function

Type 4 functions use a subset of PostScript language to define arbitrary calculations.

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | Must be `4`. |
| `Domain` | array | Array of 2 × m numbers defining input ranges. |
| `Range` | array | Array of 2 × n numbers defining output ranges. |

The stream contains PostScript code enclosed in braces { }. Available operators include:
- **Arithmetic**: abs, add, atan, ceiling, cos, cvi, cvr, div, exp, floor, idiv, ln, log, mod, mul, neg, round, sin, sqrt, sub, truncate
- **Relational/Boolean**: and, bitshift, eq, false, ge, gt, le, lt, ne, not, or, true, xor
- **Conditional**: if, ifelse
- **Stack**: copy, dup, exch, index, pop, roll

Input values form the initial operand stack. After execution, remaining stack values become outputs. The stack must have at least 100 entries. Maximum nesting depth for braces is 255. No composite data types, procedures, variables, or names are allowed.

## Implementation Notes

All function types support clipping to domain and range. The interpolate function is fundamental:

```
y = Interpolate(x, xₘᵢₙ, xₘₐₓ, yₘᵢₙ, yₘₐₓ)
  = yₘᵢₙ + ((x - xₘᵢₙ) × (yₘₐₓ - yₘᵢₙ) / (xₘₐₓ - xₘᵢₙ))
```

Functions can be nested: Type 3 can reference any function type, creating complex compositions. Type 0 offers general approximation with reasonable accuracy. Type 2 provides simple exponential curves. Type 4 offers maximum flexibility for complex calculations without sampling limitations.

Commit message:

Refactor CMap system with improved error handling and code generation
API change: The `Predefined()` function now returns `(*File, error)`
instead of `*File`, requiring callers to handle potential errors when
loading predefined CMaps.

Enhancement: Replaced manual predefined CMap list with code generation
using `go generate`, automatically creating the `allPredefined` slice
from embedded CMap files.

Enhancement: Implemented thread-safe caching for predefined CMaps,
removing global synchronisation variables and improving concurrent
access patterns.

API change: Added `NewFromCMap()` function in the `cidenc` package to
create CID encoders from existing CMaps, along with a new `fixed`
encoder type for working with fixed CMap mappings.

Enhancement: Added mathematical rendering support to documentation
with MathJax integration and LaTeX notation for better display of PDF
function specifications.

docs/content/pdf/functions.md, after:

+++
title = 'PDF Functions'
date = 2025-06-18T13:53:00+01:00
+++

# PDF Functions

## Overview

PDF functions are parameterized mathematical transformations that map m input values to n output values. These static, self-contained numerical transformations are used throughout PDF for color transformations, halftone spot functions, smooth shadings, and other mathematical operations.

Functions operate within defined domains (valid input ranges) and optionally ranges (valid output ranges). Input values are automatically clipped to the domain, and output values are clipped to the range. All inputs and outputs must be numbers, and functions have no side effects.

PDF functions are available in PDF 1.2 and later, with Types 2 and 3 introduced in PDF 1.3.

## PDF Function Representation

PDF functions are represented as either dictionaries or streams, depending on the function type:

### Type 0: Sampled Function

Type 0 functions use a table of sample values with interpolation to approximate
functions with bounded domains and ranges. The are represented as a stream.
The stream dict contains the following keys:

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | Must be `0`. |
| `Domain` | array | Array of \(2m\) numbers defining input ranges. For each input \(i\), Domain[2i] ≤ \(x_i\) ≤ Domain[2i+1]. |
| `Range` | array | Array of \(2n\) numbers defining output ranges. For each output \(j\), Range[2j] ≤ \(y_j\) ≤ Range[2j+1]. |
| `Size` | array | Array of m positive integers specifying number of samples in each input dimension. |
| `BitsPerSample` | integer | Bits per sample value. Valid values: 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 24, 32. |
| `Order` | integer | (Optional) Interpolation order. 1 for linear, 3 for cubic spline. Default: 1. |
| `Encode` | array | (Optional) Array of \(2m\) numbers for linear mapping of inputs to sample table indices. Default: [0 (Size₀-1) 0 (Size₁-1)...]. |
| `Decode` | array | (Optional) Array of \(2n\) numbers for linear mapping of samples to output range. Default: same as Range. |

The stream contains Size₀ × Size₁ × ... × Sizeₘ₋₁ sample values, each using BitsPerSample bits. Samples are packed continuously with no padding at byte boundaries. For multidimensional input, the first dimension varies fastest. For multidimensional output, values are stored in Range order.

Type 0 functions clip inputs to domain, encode to sample indices, interpolate between nearest samples, decode the result, and clip to range.

### Type 2: Power Interpolation Function

Type 2 functions define power interpolation: y = C0 + x^N × (C1 - C0).
(The PDF spec calls "exponential interpolation".)

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | Must be `2`. |
| `Domain` | array | Array of 2 × m numbers defining input ranges. For each input i, Domain[2i] ≤ xi ≤ Domain[2i+1]. |
| `Range` | array | (optional) Array of 2 × n numbers defining output ranges. For each output j, Range[2j] ≤ yj ≤ Range[2j+1]. |
| `C0` | array | (Optional) Array of n numbers defining function result when x = 0.0. Default: [0.0]. |
| `C1` | array | (Optional) Array of n numbers defining function result when x = 1.0. Default: [1.0]. |
| `N` | number | The interpolation exponent. |

Domain must ensure x ≥ 0 if N is non-integer, and x ≠ 0 if N is negative. When N = 1, the function performs linear interpolation between C0 and C1. Each output component j is calculated as: yⱼ = C0ⱼ + x^N × (C1ⱼ - C0ⱼ).

### Type 3: Stitching Function

Type 3 functions combine multiple 1-input functions across different subdomains to create a single function.

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | Must be `3`. |
| `Domain` | array | Array of 2 × m numbers defining input ranges. For each input i, Domain[2i] ≤ xi ≤ Domain[2i+1]. |
| `Range` | array | (Optional) Array of 2 × n numbers defining output ranges. For each output j, Range[2j] ≤ yj ≤ Range[2j+1]. |
| `Functions` | array | Array of k 1-input functions to be stitched. All must have same output dimensionality. |
| `Bounds` | array | Array of k-1 numbers defining subdomain boundaries. Must be in increasing order within Domain. |
| `Encode` | array | Array of 2 × k numbers mapping each subdomain to corresponding function's domain. |

The domain is partitioned into k subdomains using Bounds values. The first subdomain is [Domain₀, Bounds₀), intermediate subdomains are [Boundsᵢ, Boundsᵢ₊₁), and the last is [Boundsₖ₋₂, Domain₁]. Special cases apply when Domain₀ = Bounds₀. Each input value is mapped to its subdomain, encoded using the Encode array, then passed to the corresponding function.

### Type 4: PostScript Calculator Function

Type 4 functions use a subset of PostScript language to define arbitrary calculations.

| Key | Type | Description |
|-----|------|-------------|
| `FunctionType` | integer | Must be `4`. |
| `Domain` | array | Array of 2 × m numbers defining input ranges. For each input i, Domain[2i] ≤ xi ≤ Domain[2i+1]. |
| `Range` | array | Array of 2 × n numbers defining output ranges. For each output j, Range[2j] ≤ yj ≤ Range[2j+1]. |

The stream contains PostScript code enclosed in braces { }. Available operators include:
- **Arithmetic**: abs, add, atan, ceiling, cos, cvi, cvr, div, exp, floor, idiv, ln, log, mod, mul, neg, round, sin, sqrt, sub, truncate
- **Relational/Boolean**: and, bitshift, eq, false, ge, gt, le, lt, ne, not, or, true, xor
- **Conditional**: if, ifelse
- **Stack**: copy, dup, exch, index, pop, roll

Input values form the initial operand stack. After execution, remaining stack values become outputs. The stack must have at least 100 entries. Maximum nesting depth for braces is 255. No composite data types, procedures, variables, or names are allowed.

## Implementation Notes

All function types support clipping to domain and range. The interpolate function is fundamental:

```
y = Interpolate(x, xₘᵢₙ, xₘₐₓ, yₘᵢₙ, yₘₐₓ)
  = yₘᵢₙ + ((x - xₘᵢₙ) × (yₘₐₓ - yₘᵢₙ) / (xₘₐₓ - xₘᵢₙ))
```

Functions can be nested: Type 3 can reference any function type, creating complex compositions. Type 0 offers general approximation with reasonable accuracy. Type 2 provides simple exponential curves. Type 4 offers maximum flexibility for complex calculations without sampling limitations.
